







    [Home]
    [Databases]
    [World Law]
    [Multidatabase Search] 
    [Help]
    [Feedback]
  



United Kingdom Supreme Court





You are here:
BAILII >>
      
      Databases >>
      
      United Kingdom Supreme Court >>
      
      Conway, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for Justice  [2018] UKSC B1 (27 November 2018)
    URL: http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2018/B1.html
Cite as: 
[2018] UKSC B1

    







[New search]







[Printable PDF version]


[Help]




  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED  KINGDOM  
   
 27 NOVEMBER  2018 
   
  Before:  
   
   
  Lady  Hale 
  Lord  Reed 
  Lord  Kerr 
   
   
  R (on the application of Conway) (Appellant)       v    Secretary of State for Justice  (Respondent)  
     
     
 AFTER CONSIDERATION of the application filed on behalf of the Appellant  seeking permission to appeal the order made by the Court of Appeal on 27 June 2018 and of  the  notice of objection filed by the  Respondent 
   
 THE COURT ORDERED  that 
   
   
 (1)                                    permission to appeal be REFUSED for the reasons  attached 
   
   
 (2)                                    the Appellant pay the Respondent’s costs of the application and, where  the  Respondent applies for costs, the costs to be awarded be  assessed. 
   
   
   
 Registrar 
 27 November  2018 
     R (ON THE APPLICATION OF CONWAY)  
   v     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR JUSTICE APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL  
   
 1.         Mr  Noel  Conway  applies  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  against  the dismissal of his appeal from the decision of the Divisional Court refusing  his application for a declaration that the ban on assisting suicide, contained in section  2(1) of the Suicide Act 1961, is incompatible with his rights under article 8 of the  European Convention on Human  Rights. 
   
 2.        Mr Conway suffers from motor neurone disease, a neurological disease which  attacks the  nerve  cells  responsible  for  voluntary  muscle  movement.  He  is  now  a  wheelchair- user and requires ever-increasing levels of help with everyday life. In particular,  he finds  it  increasingly  difficult  to  breathe  without  mechanical  assistance  in  the  form  of non-invasive  ventilation  (NIV).  He  now  requires  NIV  for  around  23  hours  a  day. When  it  is  predicted  that  he  will  have  less  than  six  months  to  live,  he  would  like  a medical  professional  to  be  able  to  prescribe  him  medication  which  he  himself  can choose to take to bring his life to an end when and where he would like. Assisting  him to commit suicide in this way is currently a serious criminal offence carrying  a  maximum sentence of 14 years’  imprisonment. 
   
 3.        Mr  Conway  could  bring  about  his  own  death  in  another  way,  by  refusing  consent  to the continuation of his NIV. That is his absolute right at common law. Currently, he  is not  dependent  on  continuous  NIV,  so  could  survive  for  around  at  least  one  hour without  it.  But  once  he  becomes  dependent  on  continuous  NIV,  the  evidence  is  that withdrawal would usually lead to his death within a few minutes, although it can take a  few  hours  or  in  rare  cases  days.  The  evidence  from  the  specialist  in  palliative  care who is looking after him is that medication can be used to ensure that he is not  aware of the NIV being withdrawn and does not become uncomfortable and  distressed. 
   
 4.        However,  Mr  Conway  does  not  accept  that  the  withdrawal  of  his  NIV  under  heavy sedation would be a dignified death. He does not know how he would feel, whether  he would  experience  the  drowning  sensation  of  not  being  able  to  breathe,  whether  he would  be  able  to  hear  his  family  and  feel  their  touch.  Taking  lethal  medicine  would avoid  all  these  problems.   In   his  view,  which  is  shared  by  many,  it  is  his  life  and  he should have the right to choose to end it in the way which he considers most  consistent with his human  dignity. 
   
 5.        The question for this panel is whether his case raises an arguable point of law  of general public importance which ought to be heard by the Supreme Court at this  time. No-one  doubts  that  the  issue  is  of  transcendent  public  importance.  It  touches  us  all. We  all  have  to  experience  the  death  of  people  about  whom  we  care.  We  all  have  to contemplate our own  death. 
   
 6.         No-one  doubts  that  the  issue  raises  arguable  points  of  law.  The  difference  between letting someone die and taking active steps to bring about their death has been  central to the common law for centuries. Some argue that to depart from that distinction is  to cross a dangerous Rubicon. Some argue that the distinction is morally and  practically indefensible.  The  Human  Rights  Act  1998  has  added  a  new  dimension  to  the  debate. All  are  agreed  that  the  ban  on  assisting  suicide  is  an  interference  with  the  right  to respect for private life protected by article 8. As the European Court of Human  Rights has  said,  in     Pretty  v  United  Kingdom      (2002) 35 EHRR 1,  para  65,  ‘The  very  essence of the Convention is respect for human dignity and human freedom’. But  several  justifications have been put forward to support a hard and fast rule  –  the protection  of weak  and  vulnerable  people  from  insidious  pressures,  respect  for  the  sanctity  of  all human life, and the preservation of trust and confidence in the medical profession.  The European  Court  has  held,  in     Nicklinson  v  United  Kingdom     (2015) 61 EHRR SE7,  that whether  an  interference  such  as  this  is  justified  is  for  each  Member  State  to  decide. There is no European consensus on the  matter. 
   
 7.         Under the United Kingdom’s constitutional arrangements, only Parliament  could  change  this  law.  But  the  Supreme  Court  could,  if  it  thought  right,  make  a  declaration that  the  law  was  incompatible  with  the  Convention  rights,  leaving  it  to  Parliament  to decide what, if anything, to do about it. The questions for the court would therefore  be twofold: (1) Is the hard and fast rule banning all assistance to commit suicide  a justified  interference  with  the  Convention  rights  of  those  who  wish  for  such assistance?  (2)   If   it  is  not,  should  this  court  make  a  declaration  to  that  effect?   In particular, is it appropriate to make such a declaration in this case? These are questions upon which the considered opinions of conscientious judges  may legitimately differ. Indeed, they differ amongst the members of this  panel. 
   
 8.        Ultimately, the question for the panel is whether the  prospects of Mr  Conway’s  succeeding in his claim before this court are sufficient to justify our giving  him permission to pursue it, with all that that would entail for him, for his family, for  those on  all  sides  of  this  multi-faceted  debate,  for  the  general  public  and  for  this  court.  Not without some reluctance, it has been concluded that in this case those prospects are  not sufficient to justify giving permission to  appeal.  



BAILII:
Copyright Policy |
Disclaimers |
Privacy Policy |
Feedback |
Donate to BAILII
URL: http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2018/B1.html



